>>REGINA MEREDITH:
If you're female,
over 40, married with kids, or
making waves in your career,
you've probably noticed some
irregularities in your body
shape or size, in
your sleep or mood.
According to Doctor
Sara Gottfried,
author of "The Hormone
Cure," hormonal imbalances
account for most of our weight,
sleep, and mood disorders.
The good news is
that these imbalances
can be corrected naturally,
without pharmaceuticals.
This means that we can feel
juicy and alive again--
if quality of life is a priority
worth putting some education
and effort into.
It's so nice to be
sitting with you.
I think I have
about 100 dog-ears
on the pages of your book
because this is actually
very useful information.
And you're getting
a lot of publicity
as a result of what you've done.
You're trying to
help women take back
their own hormonal health,
which feeds into stress,
and a lot of things that--
to the point where virtually
everybody needs to
understand these things.
So let's start
with your own story
because you've been through
your own load of stress.
You're a braniac.
Harvard, Harvard-trained,
MIT, engineer, doctor.
You've gone over
into this field now.
Give us your own
background and how
you ended up in this position.
>>SARA GOTTFRIED: Sure.
Well, I would
definitely say, Regina,
that it started with
my great-grandmother.
I want to honor her
first because she was not
the typical grandmother
who shows up
at your house with Barbies
and gum, See's candy.
She showed up with
kale, carob cookies.
And she was a serious
yogini way before there
was a yoga studio on
every street corner.
And she taught me a
really important lesson,
which is that you don't
find the answer to health
in a prescription pill bottle.
You find it in how you
craft your lifestyle.
You find it in the way
that you use your fork,
the way that you eat, move,
think, and supplement.
>>REGINA: Wise woman.
>>GOTTFRIED: Very wise woman.
Slept on a board,
outlived four husbands.
But really, it wasn't
until I was in my 30s
that this really
made sense to me.
>>REGINA: And by then, you had
already gone to medical school.
She said you're not going to
find your answers in a pill,
yet you went for the pill.
>>GOTTFRIED: And then I
went to medical school.
So I went to learn all
about the pills, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>GOTTFRIED: And
that is the nature
of conventional medicine.
We live in a culture--
and the medical industry
is part of this--
that believes that you
do find the answer
in a pill bottle.
And I disagree with that.
So I had a defining
moment when I was my 30s.
I was practicing McMedicine.
I was working at a health
maintenance organization.
I was seeing somewhere
around 30 patients a day.
And I had what I would
call the four F's.
I was frazzled,
frumpy, fat, and you
can imagine what
the fourth F was.
I was not happy.
And I had PMS, I
had low sex drive.
I felt too young to feel so old.
>>REGINA: Did you have
kids by this time?
>>GOTTFRIED: I did
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>GOTTFRIED: So I had
two kids in my 30s.
I have two daughters.
And honestly,
residency training was
nothing compared to being a mom.
>>REGINA: And it's brutal.
>>GOTTFRIED: It's brutal.
>>REGINA: Brutal hours.
>>GOTTFRIED: And we
don't talk about that.
At least in residency, when I
was working 120 hours a week
and I was on call
every third night,
I had two nights
where I could sleep.
And when you're a mom and
you step into that role,
and we're wired as
women to over-provide,
to over-accommodate,
to people please.
So for me, when I
became a mother,
that was a pivotal time.
And I was such a stress case.
Terrible PMS.
Blamed my husband for most
things, especially in the week
before my period.
And I went to my doctor.
I did what a lot of women do.
When I saw my doctor, and
I explained my symptoms,
he wrote a prescription
for an antidepressant.
So he offered me Prozac, told me
to exercise more and eat less.
And I really felt like this
was exactly the wrong advice.
So I was able to have
that moment where
I realized OK, this legacy
from my great-grandmother, it's
coming in.
And I took that
prescription, which
just left me feeling
cold, and I decided
that I needed to apply
that medical training
to my own body.
>>REGINA: And at that
time, were you a surgeon?
>>GOTTFRIED: I was.
I was board-certified
as an OB/GYN.
I'm still board-certified
as an OB/GYN,
although my focus is really on
hormones and self-realization,
really.
But at that time, I was
doing hysterectomies
during the day, prescribing
birth control pills-- which
I no longer think
is a good idea--
and I was delivering
babies at night.
I was burning the
candle at both ends.
This is not a unique story.
So many women are
experiencing this.
And when I decided to take
a look at my own hormones,
when I did what we call here in
the Silicon Valley biohacking,
and really take on my own
physiology, and figure out,
OK, why do I feel like crap?
Couldn't I do this differently?
What I found was that my
cortisol, my main stress
hormone, was sky high.
It was three times the normal
range, the optimal range.
And that was not something
that my conventional physician
would ever test for me.
So that's what got
me to start thinking
about a different way of
approaching the hormonal issues
that women have.
And I don't want to be
overly reductionistic
and say that all the problems
we face as women and men
are hormonal.
But they're a big part of it.
They really drive what
we're interested in.
The drive our
metabolism, and our mood,
and whether we have
sugar cravings.
They drive a lot of our
quality of life day to day.
>>REGINA: So if you
take our lives back,
say, maybe five or
six decades, which
had a different set
of stressors to it.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: But say you're a
woman, say you're a mother.
Your husband is
selling something
or he's going to work somewhere,
and you have a few kids
to raise.
And you're making
cakes in the afternoon
for when they come
home, and you're
washing your clothing by hand,
and the way of life then,
what would a cortisol
profile look like then?
>>GOTTFRIED: Such
a juicy question.
So the way that I
would answer that
is to start first with the data.
And then maybe fill
in some of the theory,
based on what I know from
observing women and men for 20
years.
First, we know from
studies that have
been done that women are less
happy now than they've ever
been in the history
of the world.
And I'm a feminist.
I really believe that women
bring so much value and so many
important things to the table
when it comes to equality.
And I'm a big fan of women
stepping into their power.
At the same time, I
really feel like there's
a cost to the women's movement.
So dialing back
60 to 70 years, I
would say that my
great-grandmother, who
was a bit of a
radical, she did not
have the cortisol
issues that I have.
She was not trying to raise
her children in a city
where she didn't have
any other family.
I think that's a big part of it.
>>REGINA: That's a big--
the whole breakdown
of family and extended family.
Yeah, absolutely.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
We know that Hillary
Clinton famously
said it takes a village
to raise a child.
And I would say, as a
woman in perimenopause,
that it takes a village
to do most things.
Yes, for sure, with raising a
child, but many of the things
that we are trying
to do as women.
>>REGINA: Just the
sheer comfort of knowing
you have aunts, and sisters,
and grandmothers nearby.
If your life is in
any kind of stress,
you have someone to
help share the burden.
Also to talk to, and
confide in, and trust.
Those factors aren't there.
>>GOTTFRIED: They're not there.
We've really lost a connection
to those intimate relationships
with our extended family.
And I think that's
an important part
of how women cope with stress.
We know that, unfortunately,
stress favors men.
And I'm saying
that as a feminist,
and it pains me a
bit to say that.
But we know that the way
that we deal with stress
is different as women.
We also, we have some
strategies that I
think are more effective than
the strategies that men use,
but not all of us are
using those strategies.
One strategy, for example,
is estrogen and oxytocin.
So we know that the classic
stress research that
was done in the 1930s by Walter
Cannon at Harvard Medical
School, he found that people
go into fight or flight
when they have a
stress response.
And that's a great system
for dealing with danger--
when you're the tiger chasing
after you, for instance.
But his research
was done in men.
And it was assumed
to apply to women.
And it doesn't apply to women.
So some women go
into fight or flight,
especially under
physical danger.
But when it comes
to emotional stress,
women respond very differently.
>>REGINA: More depression?
>>GOTTFRIED: Well, that's one
of the downstream effects,
I would say.
Certainly women have much
higher rates of depression,
of thyroid problems, of sleep
issues-- double the rate
of sleep issues.
We're on twice as
many antidepressants.
That's another conversation.
But when it comes to the
stress response, what
we know from some of
the research at UCLA
with Shelley Taylor,
for instance,
is that women tend and befriend.
So when you call a
girlfriend because you've
had a fight with
your darling husband,
it's a very important
hormone therapy
that you're getting when
you pick up the phone.
You are raising your oxytocin.
And a lot of people
think that oxytocin
is something that you release
when you have an orgasm
or when you breastfeed.
But it turns out
that oxytocin is
one of the most powerful
ways to lower your cortisol.
Cortisol's that
main stress hormone.
It's a little bit more
complicated than that,
but I think that's a
good way to describe it.
>>REGINA: And you can get
it as easily as a hug.
>>GOTTFRIED: So a hug, yes.
There's so many different
ways to raise your oxytocin,
and one of them is hugging.
I can't remember the name of
the guy who did the Ted talk,
but he talks about
eight hugs a day,
how that's the right
dose if you look
at the physiology of oxytocin.
And by the way, you have to
hug a man a little bit longer
than you have to hug
a woman because we're
a little better at
making oxytocin.
>>REGINA: OK, OK.
>>GOTTFRIED: So hug your
man a little longer.
>>REGINA: Takes them longer
to get the buzz, all right.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: That's interesting.
OK.
So continue on with that.
So the way that our
bodies handled stress then
might look like what compared
to what we're now experiencing
in the modern
lifestyle of today.
>>GOTTFRIED: Well,
there's a number
of different differences.
And I think it might
be worthwhile to take
on a few of these individually.
Another huge change since
six or seven decades ago
is the food that we're eating.
Michael Pollan has
talked about how
if you're confused
about what to eat,
just eat what your
great-grandparents ate, right?
That makes such a difference.
>>REGINA: That's true.
>>GOTTFRIED: Right?
Eat whole foods.
Eat pastured milk.
Eat eggs that are not from
stressed-out chickens,
but from chickens
that are happy.
So I really believe
that the food industry
has changed dramatically.
There's so many
reasons for that.
The cow that you get at Safeway
is very different than the cow
that my great-grandmother
was eating
six or seven decades ago.
It's one of the
reasons why we have
a much higher rate of dairy
allergy, for instance.
We know that gluten has
dramatically changed.
And the way that my
grandmother ate bread,
it was often made by hand.
There's almost a meditative
quality to making bread.
>>REGINA: Maybe
locally milled grain.
>>GOTTFRIED: Locally
milled grain.
And what we have now is
bread that has bromide in it,
which causes a number of
problems with your thyroid.
It has a form of gluten
that is inflammatory.
>>REGINA: To create
fluffy white bread.
>>GOTTFRIED: Fluffy white bread.
There's a big difference in
terms of the food industry.
I don't want to get on a
soapbox about just that.
But we've got all
these different drivers
of inflammation.
Cortisol's one of them,
being more stressed.
My great-grandmother
didn't have an iPhone,
for instance, which is a
blessing and curse, right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>GOTTFRIED: I can
do GPS for the Soul,
and I can actually monitor
my stress response now.
But my grandmother
didn't need to do
that six or seven
decades ago like I do.
And she didn't have someone
texting her and calling
her the way that I do.
So women, I think,
are more overwhelmed.
I think we have an
epidemic of women
who feel stressed
out and overwhelmed.
Maybe a little chubbier
than they want.
More mood issues.
And the root of it
is hormone imbalance.
And if you learn
nothing else today,
but that's a really
important message, I think.
That it's not you,
it's your hormones.
>>REGINA: Which you address in
great detail, every hormone,
every way to approach it in
a natural way, in your book.
You've done a
beautiful job of that.
We're going to get into some
of the really key hormones
and how you can manage them
naturally rather than go
get a pill for your depression.
And one thing
you're talking about
is I'm noticing among women
more and more, as time goes on,
there's a kind of
hypervigilance going on now.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: I don't know
any other word for it.
It's like you're on alert all
the time, watching over this,
watching over that.
Making sure it all
comes together,
the house, the home, the
kids, the commuting, whatever,
comes together.
That seems to me to be one
of the greatest stressors,
is the mind never just relaxes.
You go to bed, you're
running your list.
You wake up, you have
a list waiting for you.
Now, this affects men too.
But we know that women
tend to multitask and take
on more responsibility
when it comes
to the domestic and
child-rearing aspects
in general.
So of course, more
hypervigilance.
>>GOTTFRIED: Definitely
more hypervigilance.
You're absolutely right.
If you look at the
nervous system--
I like to make this
astonishingly easy
because you can have your eyes
glaze over pretty fast when
you're talking about
biochemistry or genetics,
and how it interacts
with the environment.
So when it comes to
the nervous system,
the way that I think
about it really
simply is that you've
got an on button
and you've got an off button.
The on button is the
sympathetic nervous system.
It's what it allows
us to deal with, say,
the alarm that
went off in my home
on Saturday night when my
husband was out of town.
And when that alarm went off,
I went into hypervigilance.
I could feel my cortisol
going through the roof.
I was certain that there was a
robber or something happening
upstairs.
I had my two daughters here.
I felt really vulnerable.
It's not the best situation
for me as a woman.
The female matrix doesn't do
that well being the protector.
When my husband's here,
and he's lying by my side,
and the alarm goes off?
I don't have that same response.
I can actually go back to
bed after he goes and deals
with it.
So you're absolutely right
about this hypervigilance.
We are really good
at this on button.
We're not so good
at the off button.
So the off button is the
parasympathetic nervous system.
And we want this lovely
dance between the two,
like a tango, where
you're not in hyperdrive,
you're not constantly
pushing that on button.
Most of us are like race
car drivers, I think.
I'm going to give you a male
analogy, how about that?
So I think of race
car drivers, I
think about how
their mastery doesn't
come from pressing the
pedal to the metal.
It comes from knowing when
to take a strategic break.
It comes from figuring
out I need a pit stop.
I need some new tires.
I need to know when to hit the
pause button so that I really
have mastery around my
success as a race car driver.
So we've got to really focus
on that off button, something
that I think you've
done so beautifully,
Regina, in your career.
So I feel like when I have a
woman who comes and sees me
in my practice--
and I'll tell you
about one that I saw this week.
I have a woman named
Joan, who is 47 years old.
And she came to me and she said,
"I would rather do anything
than have sex with my husband.
I would rather be on Facebook.
I'd rather garden.
I'd rather drink a smoothie.
And it's affecting our marriage.
I feel really bad about it.
I love my husband.
But I feel like I am
such as stress case.
I'm running around,
task to task,
not able to slow down and
enjoy sex with my husband.
Can't you just give you
some of that testosterone?
I heard testosterone
would help."
So here again, she's talking
about a bioidentical hormone,
but she's jumping
to the prescription.
And I think it's so
important to look at,
upstream, what are
the root causes.
Because when you
find the root cause
rather than being in a
rush to mask the symptom,
that's where you're more
likely to have a cure.
You're more likely to create
this good neighborhood.
So what we found with her
was that her cortisol,
similar to mine in my 30s,
was quite high in the morning.
And then it was quite
low in the afternoon.
And it made her have this
brain fog, like low energy
in the afternoon.
And so what we
figured out was a way
to manage her cortisol
so that we could get it
into that Goldilocks
position in the morning.
Not too high.
Not that tired, but
wired stress feeling
where you're
hypervigilant, right?
>>REGINA: A terrible
feeling, yeah.
>>GOTTFRIED: And then in the
afternoon when she has that
brain fog and she's
reaching for, I don't know--
>>REGINA: A mocha.
>>GOTTFRIED: --a
latte, chocolate,
anything-- what we did there
is we actually had her start
doing a form of exercise
that would help her
with her cortisol levels
and reduce the sugar
cravings that she was having.
>>REGINA: And that's really
key because all exercise is not
equal.
>>GOTTFRIED: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Especially
depending on your own profile.
Some are jacking up cortisol
and some are soothing it, right?
>>GOTTFRIED: So true, and I
think we don't realize this.
We've got this idea
that one size fits
all when it comes to
our health, and nothing
could be further from the truth.
We've really got to figure out
how do we calibrate for you.
>>REGINA: So what
happened to this lady?
So you get her on
appropriate exercise
in the middle of the
afternoon instead of caffeine.
>>GOTTFRIED: So we
changed her cortisol.
And the cool part
here is that when
you change the root cause,
and her high cortisol
in the morning, low cortisol
in the afternoon, what we found
was that we were able to get
her other hormones into balance.
So in her situation,
she had what
I would call a problem with
hormonal Charlie's Angels.
Can I mention that, too?
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>GOTTFRIED: When I was
going through this biohacking
exercise in my
30s, and I realized
that my cortisol was high.
And one of the reasons
why I was gaining weight
was because my thyroid
wasn't working well.
It was low.
I also had estrogen dominance.
I had pretty much every problem
a woman could have, hormonally.
And I came to this conclusion.
I had another epiphany, which
is that you want three hormones
in particular to support you.
And this is another
place where I
love to keep it
astonishingly simple.
These are your hormonal
Charlie's Angels.
They are cortisol,
estrogen, and thyroid.
In men, I like to always give
the men a little something
to think about.
In men, it's a
little bit different.
It's cortisol,
testosterone, thyroid.
If you have those three
hormones working for you, not
against you, you are going to
be able to feel so much better.
Like you're living
life fully, like
you're able to rock
your mission and be
of service in a whole new way.
So what we did with this woman
was we worked on the cortisol.
That actually
helped her thyroid.
>>REGINA: Yes, because
the two are intertwined.
>>GOTTFRIED: They
are intertwined.
When one goes up,
the other goes down.
And thyroid has a lot
of important roles.
We know that 20% of
people with depression
have low thyroid function.
And it makes me crazy when
someone comes to see me.
They get started on
an antidepressant
and no one ever
checked their thyroid.
So we want to think about that.
The other piece for
her is that her thyroid
was a big part of
her low sex drive.
So she had hypervigilance,
low thyroid function,
and she was 47.
So she was right
at that age where
I think about it as a
perfect storm, where
you have a problem
with all three
of these hormonal
Charlie's Angels.
So in her situation,
her estrogen was lower.
It was causing some
vaginal dryness.
And that was part
of the reason why
she wasn't enjoying sex as much.
Her orgasms had changed.
The lining of her lady
garden, her female genitalia,
was starting to change.
Testosterone was lower
because of the high cortisol.
So when you go to the root
cause and you fix the cortisol,
the beautiful thing
is the crosstalk
between these hormones.
So when we did that,
when we got her cortisol
to support her
again, her thyroid
got into the optimal range.
Her estrogen balance got better.
We did a little bit of
local therapy in the vagina
with some bioidentical,
lowest dose estrogen.
>>REGINA: Creams.
>>GOTTFRIED: And it
made a big difference
with the vaginal dryness.
It also helped her orgasms.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>GOTTFRIED: So
one of the things
that she didn't tell
me when we first
started talking is that she
had always really enjoyed sex.
And she really enjoyed the
orgasms that she would have.
And she felt like in
her 40s, the orgasms
were just slowly fading.
They weren't toe-curling
like they were in the past,
in her 20s and in her 30s.
And she could barely even notice
if she was having an orgasm.
And part of that was
an estrogen effect.
>>REGINA: Too much estrogen?
>>GOTTFRIED: It's a little
bit more complicated.
In her situation,
she was actually low
in estrogen, which is
why she had the dryness.
But you're right that just
as when I was in my 30s
and I had estrogen
dominance, which is common--
it's about 70 to 80% of women
between the ages of 35 and 45--
that's the first part
of perimenopause.
So phase one, perimenopause.
Your progesterone
is low, and you
get into estrogen dominance.
It's another tango.
You want a really nice
ratio between progesterone
and estrogen.
Estrogen's like that.
It's the archetypal
feminine hormone.
It gives us breasts,
and hips, and makes
us juicy in our
joints, in our vagina.
And progesterone is
like that stable partner
that you can really rely on.
It soothes you.
You feel protected.
Protects your uterus.
Helps you calm down.
It's like nature's Valium.
And the first thing that
happens between 35 and 45
is that your ovaries don't
make as much progesterone.
And a lot of women feel this,
like it's harder to calm down.
They have that
hypervigilance, right?
>>REGINA: And don't sleep well.
>>GOTTFRIED: They
don't sleep well,
and then they get
into this spiral.
When you don't sleep well,
it raises your cortisol.
Then you start drinking
coffee in the morning
and it's all you can think
about when you wake up.
>>REGINA: Or taking Ambien
or some drug at night.
>>GOTTFRIED: Or taking
a sleeping pill.
When you don't sleep well
at night, raises cortisol.
And then you start
looking for sugar,
because it can make you
have sugar cravings.
It can give you
problems with insulin.
And when insulin starts to rise,
as it does when cortisol starts
to rise, that makes you lay
down more fat, especially right
here at the muffin top.
So there's this whole
vicious cycle that happens.
And what I really want
women to understand
is that you're not
doing anything wrong.
There's probably a
biological reason
why you feel overwhelmed,
why you feel hypervigilant.
It's not a matter of
you're missing the mark.
I want you to start
with the biology.
I think that's a really
important message.
>>REGINA: Well, you've
helped thousands
of women on this level
already, haven't you?
>>GOTTFRIED: Well, I've
been very fortunate.
I've been seeing
patients for awhile.
I started at Harvard
Medical School in 1989.
Actually, I moved
there from Alaska.
There are not many Alaskans who
go to Harvard Medical School.
>>REGINA: No.
>>GOTTFRIED: No.
And there's even this
attitude in Alaska--
I moved from Maryland
to Alaska when I was 10.
There's an attitude in Alaska
that if you go to an Ivy League
school, you need to overcome it.
So I don't come to you
as I'm from Harvard.
I have some modesty around this.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
You were just talking about
muffin tops a little bit ago.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes, muffin tops.
>>REGINA: Now, when we were
talking about this cycle of
stressed out female
hormones, and some
of the primary
players-- and we're
going to go into a couple of
them in more detail in a bit.
But there's also a
psychological factor.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: And that is when
your great-grandmother hit
her 50s, 60s, and 70s,
she wasn't expecting
to look like she did in her
20s and 30s, which we do now.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: Are we
totally delusional?
I mean, should this
even be a goal?
You're wearing tight
jeans at 50, 60, and 70.
And then you're upset because
you have a muffin top?
What's going on here
psychologically,
and how much of this do you have
to deal with with your clients?
Just their own self-perception.
>>GOTTFRIED: Well,
in some ways, I
don't think we need patriarchal
society to hold us back anymore
because we do it to ourselves.
And we're surrounded by all
of these images and media--
everyone knows this-- of
the ideal of the female form
being what I would call
an anorexic adolescent.
>>REGINA: 6 feet
tall, 115 pounds.
>>GOTTFRIED: 6 feet tall, a
freak of nature, honestly.
>>REGINA: A genetic mutation.
>>GOTTFRIED: So
someone who's got
DNA that makes them incredibly
tall, not have much fat at all
on their body.
And it's a completely
unattainable ideal.
So yes, I do feel like
we need to be empowered
around understanding what
it looks like to nurture
ourselves, to nourish ourselves.
Now, we all have
different ways to do that.
For some people,
it's meditation.
it's learning how
to hit that pause
button, the off button.
But when it comes to this
standard that we have for
ourselves-- and you mentioned
my great-grandmother.
She was not wearing skinny
jeans, you're absolutely right.
She didn't have
low-rise jeans or need
to worry about a muffin top.
She didn't have a
muffin top because I
think her cortisol was right
in that Goldilocks position--
not too high, not too low.
But she also wasn't
feeling pressure
to look like she was
25 when she was 50.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's a really
big one, the damage
it does on the psyche
of women to try
to attain this thing that's
really unattainable by way
of imagery, by what's put
out by Madison Avenue.
I know very few
women they don't have
a fair amount of self-loathing
about their bodies,
and some of them
are very beautiful.
>>GOTTFRIED: It's very true.
There's a disconnect
between who we are
and who we feel we should be.
>>REGINA: And let me
ask you then on that.
If you were to go back to an
era and look at Hollywood--
let's say Hollywood maybe
in a purer sense, where
you have people from the
town and community, and even
Aunt Bea thrown in there.
If you looked at women
from another time,
where would you say a
standard healthy female form
actually existed?
Because I know there's
no standard among women,
but what era would
we look to where
that's natural-- some
people worked on the farm,
some people have to walk
because they didn't have cars.
It was just a more
organic kind of lifestyle,
but not necessarily focused on
oh, I've got to lose weight.
>>GOTTFRIED: Sure.
Well, you know,
there's-- we've gone--
the pendulum swings
back and forth, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>GOTTFRIED: You can think of
the flappers in the '20s who
were really skinny,
had no breasts,
and had almost no estrogen.
I don't think that's
the healthiest form.
I also think Twiggy in the '60s
is not the healthiest form.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it
was not healthy.
>>GOTTFRIED: So it's not those.
I'll start with the
process of elimination.
The first thing I thought of
when you asked this question
was actually an
African tribe, where
the elders, the women who
were over the age of 50,
the menopausal women,
teach young men
how to please women sexually.
Now to me, that's the best
use of the female form.
>>REGINA: Yeah, absolutely.
>>GOTTFRIED: Doesn't that
sound like a great tribe?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>GOTTFRIED: But to get to
your question about Hollywood
and what's healthy.
When I think about
the Victorian era,
when I think about
the form of women
when it was valued for them
to have more fat on them,
I don't necessarily think
that that was so good
either because many of those
women were wearing corsets.
They were choking in
their ribs so tight
that they could barely breathe.
>>REGINA: They didn't know then
you can just have them removed.
>>GOTTFRIED: Right.
Look at how popular Spanx are.
It's not that we're
so different now.
And what I think
is important to me
is a level of
freedom, and a level
of being able to authentically
pursue your dream,
whatever that is.
I think in terms of
Hollywood, of Kate Hepburn.
I think of Meryl Streep.
I am riveted every time
I watch Meryl Streep.
Doesn't matter what
role she's playing.
She can be Maggie Thatcher
with Alzheimer's disease
and I am crazy for her.
I don't mind if she's got 10
or 20 extra pounds on her.
I think she looks glorious.
She is radiant.
So to me, it's
more about agency.
It's more about freedom
and empowerment.
Really, women having
more choices, not fewer.
So if we're trying to weigh
120 pounds maybe 5 foot 5,
there's a cost to that.
If you go on Atkins because
you're trying to lose your fat,
that raises cortisol.
Turns out that cortisol
not just depletes you
of your happy brain chemicals
and gives you a muffin top,
it also accelerates
the aging of your skin.
So it affects the
skin about 20 x more
than other parts of your body.
And this is really
a place where I
think hormone balance and
health is present outside.
It's a reflection of
what's happening inside.
Your skin is a mirror of
what's happening in your mind.
>>REGINA: Very good point
>>GOTTFRIED: So I think that's
an important piece as well.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK.
So let's start looking at
some of the simple things.
We're going to go to more on
a chemical level in the body.
When we look at some
of the top interrupters
for balanced hormones,
what are some of the things
that we take in?
You say fork.
The fork to the mouth is
really an important part.
And look at where the
interrupters are happening
and then look at how we
can begin restoring them.
How we can begin restoring
cortisol naturally.
You talked about this one case.
But there are other
things we can do too.
There are herbal
remedies as well.
And I'd like to get
into some of them
so people can see
themselves in this story.
>>GOTTFRIED: Sure, sure.
And I really think
it's important to say
that the cool part here is
this isn't some huge project.
Small hinges swing big doors.
So I'm really happy
to talk about what's
proven and also these smaller
things that you can be doing.
Maybe as you listen today,
maybe what I would want,
what I would prescribe, is
to pick one or two things
that we're talking about today.
So the other piece that
I think is important
is that when it comes
to hormone imbalance,
it's easier to
rebalance your hormones
than to live with the
misery of hormone imbalance.
So I think that's an important
piece to take away as well.
So when it comes to what do you
do, what are the interruptors,
I think about the interrupters
in a systematic way.
>>REGINA: And you're really
big on scientific studies.
>>GOTTFRIED: Huge.
>>REGINA: So I want to
just say that for you
that it's not
conjecture on your part.
You really follow what
works by way of the studies.
>>GOTTFRIED: Well, this
is an important piece
that you're raising,
because not only do I
believe that women
deserve the best
evidence behind any
recommendation that's made.
That's true for
men too, but women
are the ones that were part of
this vast, uncontrolled medical
experiment for 57 years
in the United States.
When Premarin was one of the
most popular prescriptions.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>GOTTFRIED: So it's a form
of estrogen that was used.
Women were promised that they
would stay feminine forever
and young forever if they
took this prescription.
And oh, by the way, it causes
endometrial cancer, cancer
of the uterus, cancer
of the breasts,
increases your risk
of heart disease.
And we didn't know that until
we did the best type of study,
which is a randomized trial.
And that was not
done until 1999.
The next study was done in
2002, which most people know
about the Women's
Health Initiative.
But 57 years of a vast,
uncontrolled medical experiment
on women.
And that's shameful.
I was part of the conventional
medical training that was not
just suggesting
conventional hormone
therapy, synthetic
hormone therapy, to women,
but proselytizing.
So I really feel like
we've got a high bar now
in medicine to keep
women safe when
it comes to these interventions.
So let's get to some
of those interventions.
When it comes to your fork,
we'll start with that.
Maybe how you eat, move,
think, and supplement.
When it comes to your fork,
some of the worst players,
the interrupters are
dairy, especially
conventional cow dairy.
Not organic.
>>GOTTFRIED: Not
raw, necessarily.
It seems to have a
different spectrum.
>>GOTTFRIED: Not
raw necessarily.
It's a different spectrum.
When it comes from
goats and sheep,
that's better, less
allergenic, less likely
to create a bad
neighborhood in your body.
It's all about if we look at
personalized medicine, which
is where we're going
in the next 10 years.
It's the future of medicine.
Where we know in 2015 that it's
going to cost you about $100
to test your DNA,
which is super cool.
Right now it costs
about $10,000.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that is very cool.
>>GOTTFRIED: And
the interesting part
is that it's not just your DNA
that determines your health.
It is the way you
construct your life.
It's the supplements you
take, it's the amount of sleep
that you have.
50 to 80% of how
your DNA is expressed
is based on those four factors,
how you eat, move, think,
and supplement.
So that's an
incredible opportunity.
>>REGINA: It is.
The field of epigenetics
is really growing fast.
>>GOTTFRIED: So cool.
>>REGINA: Bruce Lipton,
of course, is our guru.
He's done so much to really
help the public at large
understand this.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: That you're not
a victim of your genes.
>>GOTTFRIED: Exactly.
This is opportunity, so
step into your power.
So these are interruptors,
there's so many of them.
Oh my gosh, how much
time do we have?
>>REGINA: So we have dairy.
You were talking
about processed dairy.
>>GOTTFRIED:
Processed foods, yes.
So we're talking about the
big agricultural industry
in the US, and how they have
hijacked our hormonal health.
They are increasing the
problems in our gut.
We have more genes
in our gut than we
do anywhere else in our body.
So we really need to be paying
attention to these things.
So dairy, gluten I
mentioned as well.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>GOTTFRIED: Sugar.
I consider sugar to be
like a drive-by shooting.
And that's a little
hyperbolic, but I really
think it's important.
>>REGINA: Sara,
every person I've
interviewed that is in
the field of natural ways
to recover our health has
said exactly the same thing
without such dramatic terms.
And which is very bad
news for sugar babies who
just love having a little sugar.
But let's talk about that.
What is it doing?
>>GOTTFRIED: Well, my heart
goes out to these people.
I used to hear
jungle drums when I
was in my 30s, when I was that
four F, stressed out, working
mom.
I know what this feels
like, and I'm not
saying this with any
sort of judgment.
We've got to turn
this ship around.
So when it comes
to sugar cravings,
I just did a survey
of my community
at saragottfriedmd.com.
I've got a total
of 30,000, mostly
women, who responded to
this survey just last month.
And they told me that the top
three issues they're facing
are sugar cravings, low
or inconsistent energy,
and problems with stress.
Just feeling like they can't get
on top of the stress machine.
So those are the three
issues, and some of these
are actually conflated.
So it turns out that
cortisol is a big part
of why people have
sugar cravings.
This is actually a
really juicy one,
so maybe we could
talk about some
of the natural ways
of dealing with this.
>>REGINA: Yeah, let's do.
Please.
>>GOTTFRIED: So when you have
sugar, one of the problems
is that when you have a big
old chunk of chocolate cake--
and no one loves
chocolate like I do.
But I want you to actually
have the dark chocolate cacao.
That lowers cortisol.
>>REGINA: Really?
The natural cacao?
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
So this is super cool.
>>REGINA: But it doesn't
taste good all by itself.
You have to sweeten it with
something to make that go down.
>>GOTTFRIED: So we should have
a conversation about that,
I think.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>GOTTFRIED: So
to me, this is one
of the most exciting
randomized trials that's
ever been done in the history
of looking at cortisol.
>>REGINA: Fabulous.
>>GOTTFRIED: To show that
dark chocolate actually
lowers cortisol.
So the idea here
is that you want
to limit the amount of sugar
that's in that dark chocolate.
You're right.
Eating pure cacao is not
everyone's cup of tea.
>>REGINA: No.
>>GOTTFRIED: But if you
get a really fine, organic,
raw chocolate bar that
is 80% to 90% cacao,
that really helps you
with your cortisol level.
>>REGINA: And that
helps lower cortisol.
>>GOTTFRIED: It does.
>>REGINA: Not the study
that you talked about
by Nestle's corporation?
That was a different one.
>>GOTTFRIED: Well, this
is a randomized trial--
>>REGINA: That's wonderful.
>>GOTTFRIED: --that
actually shows
that dark chocolate does this.
>>REGINA: God, that's great.
>>GOTTFRIED: So we're not
talking about milk chocolate.
We're not talking about having
a ton of sugar in there.
>>REGINA: No.
Talking 80% and above
solid cocoa mass.
>>GOTTFRIED: That's right.
>>REGINA: Cacao mass.
OK.
>>GOTTFRIED: That's right.
So if you are eating a big
old hunk of chocolate cake
or you're choosing a doughnut,
that raises your cortisol.
So that's an interrupter.
And then along the same
continuum is actually alcohol.
Can we talk about
alcohol for a moment?
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>GOTTFRIED: This is a
really important interrupter,
especially in the female body,
the female matrix that I think
of in a functional
medicine perspective.
So alcohol.
Going back to when I was in my
30s-- I think a lot of women
can relate to this-- when
I came home and was trying
to transition to being a mom,
came home for the second shift,
right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>GOTTFRIED: What I
wanted more than anything
was a glass of wine.
So I would pour a glass of wine.
I'd start making dinner and
connecting with my family.
And then maybe I'd
have another glass.
And this is part of that
whole vicious cycle that
led to me gaining
weight in my 30s.
It turns out that in the female
body, the very thing that you
think you're getting
from alcohol,
it's actually robbing from you.
So you think that you're
hitting that pause
button with the alcohol.
You think that
you're calming down.
And it turns out
that the alcohol
is raising your
cortisol and disrupting
your sleep that night.
>>REGINA: That makes
sense because I
don't drink much at all.
I never have and when on
the rare occasion that I do,
I have the worst sleep.
And I always thought,
what's up with that?
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: So it's
raising your cortisol,
which is messing up your sleep.
>>GOTTFRIED: It is.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>GOTTFRIED: I find that
most paths lead back
to cortisol, right?
Cortisol's this really
interesting hormone
that is in charge of all these
other hormones, your hormonal
Charlie's Angels.
And a lot of people,
when they have alcohol,
they'll fall asleep more easily,
but they don't have deep sleep.
>>REGINA: You don't
stay asleep, right.
>>GOTTFRIED: You don't
have high quality sleep.
The other piece that's
important for women
is that there's a new
study that came out
in 2011, in the
Nurses' Health Study,
showing that women who
have more than three
to six servings
a week of alcohol
have a greater risk
of breast cancer.
Now, this is the first time
such a small amount of alcohol
has been shown to increase
your bad estrogens.
>>REGINA: Which makes
sense if you're also
jacking up your cortisol.
And cortisol's always
comes back as implicated
in the development of
certain cancers, right?
>>GOTTFRIED: That's right.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
It's interesting.
I've never heard that before.
>>GOTTFRIED: So this
is all part of creating
the bad neighborhood.
We used to think about
things like breast cancer
as being-- this is
something that I learned
from Susan Love, who has been
one of my mentors for a while.
She's a breast cancer
advocate and surgeon.
And she said, we used
to think, 20 years ago,
that you would have
a breast cancer cell.
And it would divide.
You'd have these daughter cells.
It would turn into a
mass that you would maybe
see on a mammogram, or you
would detect clinically,
or feel it yourself.
And we don't think that anymore.
What we think now is that
we all have mutated cells
all the time.
And it's a matter of
what kind of neighborhood
you're creating for those cells.
>>REGINA: The environment.
>>GOTTFRIED: The environment.
So when you are creating
a good neighborhood,
you have the girl scouts.
You have healthy, beautiful
vegetables every day,
five to seven colors.
You're moderating how
much alcohol you have.
You're eating the dark
chocolate, but not
two bars or one bar.
You're having a
couple of squares.
When you do that, you're
creating a good neighborhood.
When you're someone who's
hearing jungle drums unless you
have a doughnut, and cortisol
is running like crazy,
and you're drinking
more than the right dose
of coffee in the morning, you
are down that slippery slope
of creating a bad neighborhood.
And that is not a
good epigenetic thing.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK.
Interesting.
And thank you for that.
I mean, the just
distinguishing also
between the chocolate
cake versus the 80 to 90%
couple of squares of chocolate
and what it does to cortisol.
>>GOTTFRIED: Well, we
need substitutes, right?
>>REGINA: We need substitute.
>>GOTTFRIED: I'm not a big
fan of depriving women.
>>REGINA: No no, I'm not either.
And I think that's an
excellent substitute.
I want to get into some
other areas as well.
And that is, you said early
on-- let's talk a little bit,
because I want to take the time
to go through some of the more
natural ways to approach
birth control, for example.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: You're not a fan of
birth control pills anymore.
What long term,
by way of studies,
have they found out about
birth control pills?
And what are you noticing
in the women that
have been on them for
quite a long time?
>>GOTTFRIED: Well,
there's some brand
new data about birth
control pills that I think
are so important to talk about
because no one is talking
about this.
We've known for a long time that
when you go on a birth control
pill, it actually robs
you of testosterone.
So the birth control pill
is another synthetic form
of estrogen and progesterone.
When you go on it, it
raises another hormone.
You mentioned that your
audience is sophisticated,
so I'll just mention
this hormone.
It's called sex hormone
binding globulin.
It's kind of like a sponge
that basically soaks up
the free testosterone
in your body.
And the great irony here is that
for women who are having sex,
maybe for the first time,
maybe they're 22 years old
and having sex for
the first time,
they've got this normal libido.
They go on the
birth control pill.
Their testosterone goes from
normal down to almost nothing.
And they don't want to have sex.
Not only that, but
it actually affects
the receptors in their vagina.
And 20% have vaginal dryness.
>>REGINA: At 20, 25 years old.
>>GOTTFRIED: And
they're thinking,
why am I having these symptoms
that my mother is having,
who's going through menopause?
Or they feel like
they're doing something
wrong because nobody
talks about this.
They also have up to 20%
shrinkage of their clitoris
as a result of this
change in your hormones.
So no, I'm not a big fan
of the birth control pill.
I don't want to mess
with what I think
is the innate
intelligence of the body.
We've got to figure
out how do we
work with the innate
intelligence of the body,
not against it.
>>REGINA: So in this day,
what do you recommend?
>>GOTTFRIED: I'm a big
fan of barrier methods.
The problem here is that we
don't have enough options.
We need more options.
>>REGINA: So condoms--
>>GOTTFRIED: Vasectomy
is my favorite.
But if we're talking
about a 20-something,
I would say consider
the copper IUD.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yeah.
So very effective.
It's actually as effective
as getting your tubes tied,
but it's reversible.
>>REGINA: But you
used to hear everyone,
and these horrible
things happened.
>>GOTTFRIED: So
that's from the 1970s.
We've got to rebrand IUDs.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>GOTTFRIED: Here's the deal.
Can I give you one
little thing on IUDs?
>>REGINA: Yeah, please.
>>GOTTFRIED: I have a few things
that I'm a crusader around.
One's vaginal dryness,
the other's IUDs.
So we know that
women who use IUDs
are the happiest
customers of all
when it comes to contraceptives.
They have the highest
satisfaction rates.
I've had three and I know
what they mean by this.
It also has the
lowest rate of usage.
So there's a total disconnect.
Highest satisfaction,
lowest usage.
>>REGINA: And what about
any kind of problems?
>>GOTTFRIED: Well, we know
that one out of three women,
when they get a copper IUD, will
have some increased bleeding.
I had that when I had
my copper IUD put in,
but it's manageable.
It usually resolves
within a couple of months.
>>REGINA: And doesn't cause
any long-term kind of effects.
>>GOTTFRIED: Doesn't
cause long-term problems.
The problem was
actually in the 1970s,
when the Dalkon shield came out.
And it was like a
neon sign for bacteria
to come up inside the uterus.
That particular IUD
was terrible and it
got taken off the market.
But the problem is
the negative attitude
toward IUDs got
applied everywhere.
>>REGINA: Absolutely, yeah.
>>GOTTFRIED: So we've got
to rebrand IUDs together.
>>REGINA: OK.
So, there we go.
So that would be your
number one choice.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
>>REGINA: So we'll let
people run with that.
And barriers, condoms, and--
>>GOTTFRIED:
Condoms, diaphragms.
>>REGINA: Yeah, diaphragms.
>>GOTTFRIED: I'm a big
fan of the diaphragm.
You combine that.
If you are, like, a fertile
myrtle, and your partner
looks at you and
you get pregnant,
then what you want
to do is combine
some of these methods
that are less effective,
like the diaphragm, maybe
together with a condom,
especially around the time
that you're ovulating.
Or use a little bit of
natural family planning.
Have orgasmic meditation
instead of intercourse
when you're ovulation.
So I would say get creative
about how to work with this.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now let's talk about
women who have started
going into this
imbalance hormonally
and are now looking for--
Premarin's not the option.
They're now looking for
bioidentical hormones.
And at the same
time, they've heard
of Suzanne Somer's information
the last decade, a decade ago.
And then they started
hearing oh my god, it
increases rates of breast
cancer, for example.
What is the truth about
bioidentical hormones?
>>GOTTFRIED: So the
truth about bioidenticals
is actually that there's a
time and a place for them.
For women who are exquisitely
sensitive to estrogen-- when
I have women who come to
see me in my practice,
like I have a woman named
Sarah who came to see me.
And she just felt flat.
54 years old, really felt like
she lost her sense of herself.
>>REGINA: Her mojo.
>>GOTTFRIED: Her mojo, her juju.
She wasn't feeling juicy and
on it like she used to be.
She didn't feel as at
home in her body the way
that she used to.
And she also felt more
flat in terms of her mood.
So for her, what we
decided-- we went
through what I call the
Gottfried Protocol, where
we start off with how you eat,
move, think, and supplement.
Let's get cortisol
on your side again.
Not depleting you of these
really happy hormones,
like testosterone, and
estrogen, and so forth.
And then we also tried
some botanical therapies.
But when it comes to this
particular issue in menopause,
the botanicals are
not so effective.
So with her mood
issues in particular--
there's a subset
of women, 20 to 30%
that I found in my practice
over the past 20 years,
who are exquisitely sensitive to
estrogen as a mood stabilizer.
And when you put
them on estrogen,
they just overnight
feel giggly and back
home in their body again.
So I feel like there is a
time and a place for hormones.
But I really believe you want
to do that work upstream first.
You want to get the
food, the supplements,
fill in the nutritional gaps.
Do that work first
because then your dose
is going to be a lot lower.
>>REGINA: The meditative
practices, all of that.
>>GOTTFRIED: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So do the
lifestyle and food changes
in advance as your
primary maintenance.
Then you're saying as an add-on
if you're a candidate for it,
a bioidentical can be good.
What about the subject of
increased cancer rates?
Breast cancer, for example.
What was that in
relationship to?
Was that bioidenticals?
Was that pharmaceuticals?
What was it?
What is it?
>>GOTTFRIED: So this
is the situation again
where we want to know what
does the data show us.
And we don't have data to
answer all of these questions,
unfortunately.
What we know is that it's
probably not a good idea
to go on external
hormones forever.
So just with what we
know about something
called hormone
resistance-- you probably
have heard of
insulin resistance.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>GOTTFRIED: You can have
hormone resistance that
develops if you're just taking
the same dose of some hormone
externally once you
go through menopause.
So I'm not a big
fan of that either.
I'm a big fan of
this middle path
of really understanding,
OK, how can I
get my neurohormonal
dashboard to support me?
How could I manage it in a
way that really works for me,
and is calibrated and
individualized for me?
So taking this particular
issue of cancer.
We talked about the
bad neighborhood.
And what we know is that
the synthetic hormones
are definitely dangerous
and provocative.
And from the Women's Health
Initiative, what we really
believe when it comes
to breast cancer
is that it's the
synthetic progestin that's
the bad player.
So even the devil we
know, which is Premarin,
it does increase
your risk of stroke,
but it doesn't seem to have
these other ill effects,
like cancer effects,
that you see
from the synthetic progestin.
We do not have large-scale
randomized trials
that go on for years and
years, like the Women's Health
Initiative, for bioidenticals.
We have a lesser quality
study, observational studies,
especially from Europe.
And they suggest
that there's a lower
rate of breast cancer for
women who take bioidenticals.
But my way of looking at this
is it's a little bit more
nuanced than that.
We want to do randomized
trials because that's
the way that we minimize bias.
We minimize the effect of
the pharmaceutical industry,
for instance.
And when it comes
to bioidenticals,
the problem here is the one size
fits all way of approaching it.
So if you do a study,
and you're looking
at women who were on, say,
the same dose of estrodiol,
and the same dose of
natural progesterone,
some of those women have a short
serotonin transporter gene.
So this is a really
interesting gene
that's present in 40 to
45% of Caucasian women.
>>REGINA: What does that
mean, functionally speaking?
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes, let me
break it down for you.
So this is a really
interesting gene
that has a few jobs in the body.
And it's in charge of how
serotonin get shuttled around
in between your brain
cells, your nerve cells.
It regulates how much your
genes in your brain cells
make serotonin.
So it's not as simple
as a quantity issue.
But you move it
around a little less
effectively if you have a
short serotonin gene, which
is the mutation, versus
a long serotonin gene.
So just to back up for a minute.
When you inherit genes
from your parents,
you get one copy from each.
And two is a complete set.
The normal serotonin transporter
gene is to be long long.
You have a long
copy of both genes.
You can have one copy
of the short gene
or you can have two
copies of the short gene,
as if you got it
from both parents.
The other thing
that this gene does,
besides give you problems
with communicating serotonin
in the brain, is that it makes
you go into hypervigilance more
readily, especially
in perimenopause.
>>REGINA: That's where it shows
that symptomatically, you're
saying?
>>GOTTFRIED: More so for
women in perimenopause,
because when women have a
normal amount of estrogen,
say up until about
age 35, 40, 45,
they behave as if they've got
two copies of the normal gene.
Now, some of this work
was done in monkeys.
We don't know as much in humans.
Is it as simple as just giving
these women estrogen and it
makes them feel like
they're not hypervigilant?
But it makes your
amygdala in your brain,
that place in your
brain where you're just
surveying for danger everywhere.
>>REGINA: Fight or flight.
>>GOTTFRIED: Fight or flight.
It makes your amygdala hot.
It makes you perceive
danger everywhere you look.
And it makes you have a
stress response all the time
that's hard to turn off.
>>REGINA: So what percentage
of people have this short gene?
>>GOTTFRIED: 40 to
45% of Caucasians,
so it's very common.
And the interesting
part for this
is that there's actually
some simple solutions.
One of the things
that I love talk about
is in the Gottfried
Protocol, step one--
it's this progressive way of
dealing with hormone balance.
Step one is that you
fill in nutritional gaps.
Someone who's got a short
serotonin transporter gene
needs bioactive vitamin B6.
And I can tell you, in
the 50 patients that I've
treated in the past
year who have one or two
copies of the short
serotonin transporter gene,
overnight they feel
a difference when
they get this particular
supplement, bioactive vitamin
B6.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
>>GOTTFRIED: So
there's ways around it.
But I think it's so important
to understand that if you're
feeling overwhelmed, if you're
feeling like a stress case,
and like your
hypervigilant, you want
to think about the biology.
Certainly there's an
emotional piece too.
>>REGINA: Is there
a test that can
be done to determine
if you have that?
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
So there's a couple of different
ways that you can test for it.
We're getting to this era where
there's more and more testing
of genetics, which I
think is important to be
a wise, informed citizen around.
And I can tell you, most
conventional physicians
have no idea how to make
this information actionable.
So this is one of
those places where
we need to step into our
power and understand what's
going to help us if we've
got genetic issues that
are part of our challenge.
>>REGINA: So I want
to ask you one more
thing about
replacement, and that
is, what about
homeopathic hormones?
>>GOTTFRIED: So
homeopathic remedies
are really interesting.
The way that I answer a
question like that is always
to go back to my inner
geek, because you know--
>>REGINA: And you are.
>>GOTTFRIED:
--Harvard-MIT-physician-scientist.
So I always go to
the data first.
What does the science tell us?
And then I'll bring in maybe
some of my anecdotal experience
of working with
people for 20 years,
but I start with the hard data.
I think hard data's super sexy.
So when it comes to this
issue of what do we do--
>>REGINA: Some people call it
almost a whisper of hormones
when they're talking about
homeopathic hormones.
>>GOTTFRIED: Right.
>>REGINA: But they
can be effective.
And we only have a
few minutes left,
and I want to ask you about
the testing and such too.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes.
So when it comes
to homeopathics,
they're proven to be
effective for certain things.
I'm a big fan of
homeopathic remedies,
especially for my
children, especially
for allergies and some of the
other inflammatory conditions
that we face, chronic
inflammatory conditions.
I haven't been super
impressed with some
of the homeopathic remedies
from a randomized control trial
perspective.
Now, part of the
problem is we don't
have a ton of money from
the government going
into big randomized
trials looking
at homeopathic remedies.
So it may be more a matter
that we don't have the science
to say that it's good or bad.
And so in that situation,
you have to do an experiment
and see if it works for you.
>>REGINA: OK.
We'll leave it at that because
it is a more esoteric area
anyway, not that many people
are even prescribing them.
Now let's get into the
various modalities of testing.
We only have three minutes
left, so it's just zipped by.
Mammograms or thermography,
which one would you recommend?
>>GOTTFRIED: There's
no perfect screening
test for breast cancer.
So, given our limitations--
It's kind of like contraception,
honestly.
We've got lousy options.
So to me, a digital
mammogram every two
years after the age of 50, which
is what the US Preventative
Task Force rating
recommends, that's
where I think we are
in terms of the data.
I think the data looking
at women younger than that,
it's only worthwhile
if you're high risk.
I'm a big fan of thermograms.
They detect whether you
have hormone imbalance
or inflammation,
but I don't think
they're perfect on their own.
There's no perfect
screening test.
And so one of the things
I recommend, especially
with the new guidelines that
we have with mammograms,
is that you get your
first mammogram,
if you're low risk, at age 50.
Digital, because it's
lower in radiation.
Go to a place where they
really know what they're doing,
such as UCSF, which
is a world leader.
And then to do the thermogram
every alternating year
so that you have a screening
test that you're doing.
>>REGINA: OK.
Good.
Thank you on that.
That's very useful information.
Now let's look about
the other tests.
If we want to do a profile--
we have just a couple minutes
left-- do we do the saliva
tests, hair tests, blood tests?
What do we do?
>>GOTTFRIED: I typically
start with the blood tests
because it's the language
of conventional physicians.
And I really want to
bridge together this divide
that we have between
conventional medicine
and alternative medicine.
So I am a big fan
of blood testing.
The problem is it's a
snapshot of the six seconds
that a needle's in your vein.
But it's a good
place to start if you
want to look at your cortisol,
your DHEA, the balance
between your estrogen
and progesterone
and your androgens, it's
a good place to start.
If you find that you have
a problem with cortisol,
like I did when I measured
my blood in my 30s,
then you want to actually
do some more nuanced tests.
And that's where I think
saliva testing can be helpful.
So there's pluses and minuses
of each form of testing.
The other problem is this
issue of hormone resistance.
So if we go back to the woman
with the short serotonin
transporter gene,
for instance, she
develops cortisol
resistance, where
the level that you measure
of cortisol in her blood
does not necessarily
reflect what's
happening inside her cells.
And so the testing is
less helpful than asking
her questions about
her experience.
>>REGINA: So actually spending
time with your patients, again.
>>GOTTFRIED: Yes, exactly.
>>REGINA: Gee, what
a novel theory.
>>GOTTFRIED: Oh my gosh.
>>REGINA: And you do that.
You do that in spades.
And not only that,
you've taken the time
to document all this in this
book for the rest of us.
And I just want to say
you've done a lovely job.
You can see yourself in it, no
matter who's reading this book.
You can see, and your own
symptomatology in the book,
and what you can do about that.
And I just want to
say we're out of time.
And it's been a
lovely conversation.
Thank you so much for writing
this book for the rest of us
and making this
information available.
>>GOTTFRIED: Thank you, Regina.
It's my pleasure and honor.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: If you're feeling
wigged out, angry at the kids,
fat, and not at all
sexual, I highly
recommend picking up a
copy of "The Hormone Cure."
It's worth it for
the appendix alone,
with a description of all the
foods and supplements that
can help you, and
a brief description
of the role of each hormone.
And that's to say nothing of the
healing protocols themselves.
Good stuff.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.